Deadlock: when processes compete for resources and blocks each other while holding onto a resource that other processes require.

System consists of hardware and software resources used by processes.

Resources can be divided into reusable and consumable -> requested, acquired, later processed and released by relevant process

rescource allocation graph shows the current allocation of resources to processes and the current requests by processes for new resources
deadlock is possible when there are more than 1 process and more than 1 resource

state transitions:
    resource request (req r, m) by a process p for m units of a resource r -> creates m edges directed fron p to r
        may be issued when:
            1) Process p has no unsatisfiable request and thus is not blocked.
            2) Number m of request edges + k allocation edges cannot exceed the number of resources in r

    resource acquisition (acq r, m) by a process p for m units of a r reverses the direction of the corresponding request edges to
    point resources from r to point
    
    resource release (rel r, m) operation by a process p of m units of a resource r deleted m allocation edges between p and r
        may be issued when:
            1) Process p has no unsatisfiable requests and thus is not blocked
            2) The number m of units to be releasead must not exceed the total units p in currently holding.

A process is deadlocked in a state s if the process is blocked in s and if no matter what state transitions occur in the future the process remains blocked.

A state is called deadlock state if s contains two or more deadlocked processes

A state is called "safe state" if no SEQUENCE of state transitions exists that would lead from s to a deadlocked state.

Continuous deadlock detection:
If the current state is not deadlocked, then the next state s' can be blocked if:
    1) the operation that caused the transition was a request for a resource
    2) the process p that issued the request is deadlocked in s'

wait-for graph: is a resource allocation graph containing only processes where each prcoess can have multiple incoming resource allocation edges but only one outgoing
resource request edge.



Do 5.2.1

Practice exercise 5.1.3

THUR: ----------------------------------------------
Resource claim graph: is an extension of the general resource allocation graph:
    shows current allocation of resources to processes
    all current as well as all potential future requests by processes for new resources.

banker's algorithm:
    given a resource req in state s, grant the req by changing req edges to allocation edges
    executre graph reduction alg on the new state s'
    if the graph of state s' is completely reducible, then accept s' as the new state. Otherwise disallow the acquisition by reverting to state s

Tables can be used to represent the data of a resource allocation graph

Deadlock avoidance with single unit resources:
    Simplification pf bankers alsgorithm:
        Given a req edge for state s, temporarily allocate the requested resource
        Starting with the requesting process p, determine if the graph in temporary state s' contains a directed cycl.
        if no cycle exists, then accept s' as the new state. Otherwise, reject disallow the acquisition by reverting to state s

finish 5.3.1

Static deadlock detection:
    Deadlock with reusable resources:
        hold and wait: a process is already holding one resource and is requesting another resource.
        circular wait:A process must issue a resource request that closes a cylke involving at least two processes and two resources.

        Eliminating hold and wait:
            Every process must request all resources needed at the same time.
            Every process must release all currently needed resources prior to making any new request.
            A process an be given the ability to test whether a needed resource in currently available.

        Eliminating circular wait:
            A process p already holding a resource ri with the sequence number seq(ri) may only request reosurce rj where seq(ri) < seq(rj). If all processes follow the rule
            then circular wait is prevented.
        